HIDDEN TEMPLE (EL 8)
A landing of damp, uneven stone blocks overlooks a large,
impressive chamber made of dressed stone. Four pillars carved
like snakes support a ceiling 20 feet high, and a large alcove at
the northern end of the chamber holds a great stone idol—a six-
armed snake-woman with various deadly weapons in her grasp.
The paving blocks of the floor have cracked and settled badly
enough for a stream to run through the middle of the chamber.
The water flows from a passage in the north wall and vanishes
into a narrow dark fissure in the south wall. A masonry passage
in the east wall leads down into darkness.
The floor of the room is littered with strange odds and ends—
heaps of white sand, old bronze urns filled with dark oils, sacks
of roots and tubers, and stone workbenches on which lie sharp,
silver implements.
This room was formerly a hidden shrine of the Sangkon priests,
used for the darkest and most secret of their foul rites.
The passage leading from this room to area 6 is blocked by
a grell crystal wall, but the wall features a small culvert (1 foot
diameter) that permits the stream to pass through.
A grell philosopher appropriated the shrine as its workspace
and living quarters. This philosopher specializes in the study
of necromantic magic, and it used its command undead spells
to assume control over several gnoll skeletons left here long
ago by the evil priests.
The necrophilosopher is fully aware of the advantage its
flight ability offers. It hovers near the ceiling, using its spells
(summon monster III, summon swarm, ray of enfeeblement, and
ray of exhaustion) to wear down a party of dangerous enemies
while its skeleton minions attack. It joins the battle only when
its enemies have been weakened.
Several large stone urns in the northwest corner of the room
hold 175 sp, 855 gp, a pouch containing five small agates worth
25 gp each, and two scrolls: invisibility and fire shield.

Grell Necrophilosopher: 
Grell necromancer 5; CR 7; Medium aberration; 
HD 5d8+20 plus 5d4+20; hp 76; 
Init +4; 
Spd 5 ft.,fly 30 ft. (perfect); 
AC 22, touch 14, flat-footed 18; 
Base Atk +5; Grp +16; 
Atk +9 melee (1d4+1 plus paralyzation, tentacle); 
Full Atk +9 melee (1d4+1 plus paralyzation, 10 tentacles) and +4
melee (2d4, bite); 
SA constrict, expert grappler, improved grab,paralysis;
SQ blindsight 60 ft.,
flight, immunity to electricity, immunity to paralyzation, sightless; AL NE; 
SV Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +9; 
Str 12, Dex 18, Con 19, Int 16, Wis 12, Cha 6.
Skills and Feats: Concentration +12 (+16 casting defensively),
Hide +14, Knowledge (arcana) +6, Knowledge (dungeoneering)
+6, Knowledge (nature) +6, Listen +5, Move Silently +14, Search
+5, Sense Motive +3, Spellcraft +6, Spot +5; 
Combat Casting,Flyby Attack, Grell Alchemy†B, Scribe ScrollB, Spell Focus
(necromancy), Weapon Finesse.
† New feat described on page 114.
Languages: Grell, Undercommon, Common, Draconic.

Constrict (Ex): On a successful grapple check, the grell
necrophilosopher deals 1d6+1 points of damage.

Expert Grappler (Ex): A grell that chooses to grapple with
one tentacle and remain ungrappled itself takes a –10 penalty
on its grapple checks instead of the normal –20 penalty (see
Improved Grab, page 310 of the Monster Manual, for details).

The grell necrophilosopher has a +10 racial bonus on grapple
checks. (Paralyzed foes automatically lose grapple checks.)

Improved Grab (Ex): To use this ability, the grell must hit
an opponent of its size or smaller with a tentacle attack. It
can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without
provoking attacks of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check,
it establishes a hold and can constrict.

Paralysis (Ex): Any creature hit by the grell necrophilosopher’s
tentacle must make a DC 12 Fortitude save or be paralyzed for
2d4 rounds. Each additional tentacle that hits the same creature
that round increases the save DC by 1.

Sightless (Ex): The grell necrophilosopher has immunity to
gaze attacks, visual effects, illusions, and other attack forms
that rely on sight.

Wizard Spells Prepared (caster level 5th; prohibited schools
evocation and illusion): 0—acid splash (+9 ranged touch),
detect magic, disrupt undead (+9 ranged touch), mage hand, read
magic; 1st—cause fear (DC 15), mage armor*, obscuring mist, ray
of enfeeblement (+9 ranged touch), true strike; 2nd—command
undead (DC 16), detect thoughts (DC 15), resist energy, summon
swarm; 3rd—blink, ray of exhaustion (+9 ranged touch; DC 17),
summon monster III.
*Already cast.

Spellbook: as above plus 0—all except evocation and illu-
sion; 1st—chill touch, detect undead, protection from good, sleep;
2nd—daze monster, fog cloud, ghoul touch, scare; 3rd—dispel magic,
hold person, lightning bolt, water breathing.
Possessions: amulet of health +2.

Gnoll Skeleton (3): CR 1; Medium undead; HD 2d12; hp 13 each; 
Init +5; 
Spd 30 ft.; 
AC 13, touch 11, flat-footed 12; 
Base Atk +1; Grp +3;
Atk or Full Atk +3 melee (1d10+3/×3, halberd);
SQ damage reduction 5/bludgeoning,
darkvision 60 ft., 
immunity to cold, undead traits; AL NE; 
SV Fort +0, Ref +1, Will +3; 
Str 15, Dex 12, Con —, Int —, Wis 10, Cha 1.
Skills and Feats: Improved Initiative.
Languages: N/A.

Undead Traits: 
A skeleton is immune to mind-affecting spells
and abilities, poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease,
death effects, and any effect that requires a Fortitude save
unless it also works on objects or is harmless. It is not subject
to extra damage from critical hits, nonlethal damage, ability
damage to its physical ability scores, ability drain, energy drain,
fatigue, exhaustion, or death from massive damage. It cannot
be raised, and resurrection only works if it is willing. Darkvision
60 ft